h1. Preparation for JSBloggers Project

There are a few extra steps of preparation when working with Wheels projects:

h2. Installing Servers

h3. Install Adobe ColdFusion 9

* Adobe ColdFusion 9
** Download and install "http://www.adobe.com/products/coldfusion/":http://www.adobe.com/products/coldfusion/ as multiple instances
** Follow the instructions in the installation wizard and let it run to completion. Ensure that you select Multiserver configuration.
*** Presentation / Slides for "Installing Multiple Versions of ColdFusion Together":http://www.cfgothchic.com/blog/post.cfm/my-cfmeetup-presentation-installing-multiple-versions-of-coldfusion
** Name the instance **cfwheels101**
** Test at "http://localhost:8301/cfide/administrator/":http://localhost:8301/cfide/administrator/
** Path should be C:\JRun4\servers\cfwheels101\
** Our web root is "C:\JRun4\servers\cfwheels101\"

h3. Install Apache ( optional )

* Apache
** Download and install the "Win32 Binary without crypto (no mod_ssl) (MSI Installer)":http://apache.tradebit.com/pub//httpd/binaries/win32/httpd-2.2.17-win32-x86-no_ssl.msi
** We will modify three files: httpd.conf, httpd-vhosts.conf, and hosts

First uncomment these lines by deleting the hash (@#@) in front of the line and save the file.

* C:\Program Files (x86)\Apache Software Foundation\Apache2.2\conf\httpd.conf

<pre lang="cfm">
<code>
LoadModule proxy_module modules/mod_proxy.so
LoadModule proxy_http_module modules/mod_proxy_http.so
Include conf/extra/httpd-vhosts.conf
</code>
</pre>

Next add this code to the bottom the the next file, @httpd-vhosts.conf@.

* C:\Program Files (x86)\Apache Software Foundation\Apache2.2\conf\extra\httpd-vhosts.conf

<pre lang="cfm">
<code>
<VirtualHost *:80>
 ServerName wheels.local

 ProxyRequests Off
  <Proxy *>
  Order deny,allow
  Allow from all
  </Proxy>

 ProxyPass / http://wheels.local:8301/
 ProxyPassReverse / http://wheels.local:8301/
</VirtualHost>
</code>
</pre>

Finally, open the last file, @hosts@, and add this line at the top.

* C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts add this:

<pre lang="cfm">
<code>
127.0.0.1 	wheels.local
</code>
</pre>

Now instead of going to "http://localhost:8301/":http://localhost:8301/, you can get to our ColdFusion server instance via "http://wheels.local/":http://wheels.local/.

h3. Install ColdFusion on Wheels

* ColdFusion on Wheels
** Download "http://cfwheels.org/download/latest-version":http://cfwheels.org/download/latest-version
** Extract and copy the files to "C:\JRun4\servers\cfwheels101"
** Test at "http://wheels.local/":http://wheels.local/ and you should see a Congratulations page

h4. Install DBMigrate Plugin

* DBMigrate
** Download "http://code.google.com/p/cfwheels-dbmigrate/":http://code.google.com/p/cfwheels-dbmigrate/
** Move the downloaded zip into "C:\JRun4\servers\cfwheels101\plugins"
** Reload CFWheels "http://wheels.local/":http://wheels.local/
** You should see DBMigrate under Plugins

h4. Install Scaffold Plugin

* Scaffold
** Download "http://cfwheels.org/plugins/listing/9":http://cfwheels.org/plugins/listing/9
** Move the downloaded zip into "C:\JRun4\servers\cfwheels101\plugins"
** Reload Wheels "http://wheels.local/":http://wheels.local/
** You should see Scaffold under Plugins

h3. Install MySQL Server

* Windows
** Download and install "http://dev.mysql.com/downloads/mirror.php?id=401202":http://dev.mysql.com/downloads/mirror.php?id=401202 

h2. Client Tools

h3. Install ColdFusion Builder

* Windows
** Download and install as standalone "http://www.adobe.com/products/coldfusion/cfbuilder/features/":http://www.adobe.com/products/coldfusion/cfbuilder/features/

h3. Install SQL Explorer

* SQL Explorer
** Open CFBuilder
** Select Help --> Install New Software...
** Click the "Add..." button
** In the "Add Repository" dialog, set the following:
*** Name: "SQL Explorer"
*** Location: http://eclipsesql.sourceforge.net/
*** Click the "OK"
** Click on the checkbox next to "SQL Explorer"
** Click the "Next" button
** On the "Install Details" window, click the "Next >" button
** On the "Review Licenses" window, select "I accept the terms of the license agreement" and then click the "Finish >" button
** When you're prompted with a "Security Warning" about the software having unsigned content, click the "OK" button to continue.
** When prompted to restart Eclipse, click the "Restart Now" button

h4. Install MySQL driver

* Download and extract "JDBC Driver for MySQL (Connector/J)":http://www.mysql.com/downloads/connector/j/
* Follow instructions to "add MySql driver":http://www.sqlexplorer.org/drivers.php
** Driver Class Name: com.mysql.jdbc.Driver

h4. Create Connection

* Follow instructions to "create a connection":http://eclipsesql.sourceforge.net/connections.php
** Name: JSBlogger
** Driver: MySQL
** URL: jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306
** Check AutoLogin
** User and Password

h3. Create JSBloggers Database

* Right-click on the JSBloggers connections and select "New SQL Editor" and run this command
** create database jsbloggers;

h2. Add JSBloggers connection

* Add DataSource through the ColdFusion Administrator
** Name: JSBloggers
** Driver: MySQL
** URL: jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/