h1. readme

ColdFusion On Wheels Training was modified from "JSBlogger":http://jumpstartlab.com/resources/rails-jumpstart/jsblogger/

h2. Abstract

"ColdFusion On Wheels":http://cfwheels.org is a powerful web application framework that has become popular in the past few years. It is relatively easy to develop with and can be used for awesome sites like "AmtrakGuestRewards.com":http://AmtrakGuestRewards.com, or cool ones like "Meritbuilder.com":http://Meritbuilder.com and "Singsnap.com":http://Singsnap.com.

You'll spend the two days working through a single concept by creating a simple blog system and learning the basics of ColdFusion On Wheels including:

* Models, Views, and Controllers
* Data Structures & Relationships
* Routing
* Migrations
* Views with forms, partials, and helpers
* RESTful design
* Using Wheels plugins

h2. Wheels History

Rob Cameron founded the ColdFusion on Wheels project in 2005. He still blogs about ColdFusion, Rails, and open source software on his personal site, "Riding the Clutch":http://www.ridingtheclutch.com/. Following Rob, Per Djurner was the principal developer of ColdFusion on Wheels and helped lead the project to finishing the 1.0 and 1.1 releases. Now Anthony Petruzzi is the principal developer of the Wheels core team. He has a blog called "Rip’s Domain":http://rip747.wordpress.com/.

Wheels approach is very different from other ColdFusion frameworks. Wheels was inspired by Ruby on Rails. Rails was extracted from the real world unlike other Java and Microsoft introduced frameworks. Rails and Wheels try to solve only the necessary problems and defer developing features until they are necessary. The simplicity approach is a big hit and has powered the growth of the Rails and Wheels communities ever since.

h2. License

These works were created by Jeff Casimir (jeff@jumpstartlab.com) and "Jumpstart Lab":http://jumpstartlab.com. They are licensed "Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0":http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/us/. If they are useful to you please drop him an email!

h2. Contributors 

Please add yourself if you helped:

Mike Henke (henke.mike@gmail.com) - "https://github.com/mhenke/":https://github.com/mhenke/

h2. Git Workflow for Contributors

This project uses the excellent "Git Workflow series":http://www.silverwareconsulting.com/index.cfm/Git-Workflow/ by "Bob Silverburg":https://github.com/bobsilverberg/ for contributions.